black and white video for a black and
white issue shout out to the only vegan
ice cream substitute in China that I
know of this is accidentally vegan this
is basically like a popsicle that's made
out of mushed up rice and sugar water
I've never seen that before in Taiwan or
Hong Kong but we have it here in unn so
regard that with some interest sorry if
you guys can hear the sound of
construction from outside of my window I
hear that twenty-four-seven beautiful
downtown kunming china um look this is
supposed to be a short video but it's
actually but a huge issue huge issue
ethically but also huge issue just in my
own life I was watching a vegan cheetahs
you now broadcast a few minutes ago and
you know cheetah was reflecting on
something that for him is very real and
I relate to why it's real for him but i
think really shows the lack of real
world experience he has with
humanitarian projects with taking
political ambitions and putting them
into action and it also reminded me very
much of a conversation at recently with
one other vegan just via skype uh
cheetah was saying that he doesn't feel
that veganism is any better than any
other human rights issue he was saying
that there are questions of human rights
such as black lives matter such as
children starving in africa such as
choose your tier jerking example and he
felt that there are good people who are
not vegan people who eat meat what have
you who are trying to make the world a
better place by engaging with any of
those issues political issues human
rights issues etc and that it's
ridiculous for vegans to think that
they're morally superior to those people
I talked about this with a one of my
fellow vegans over Skype someone who
doesn't have a youtube channel and that
fellow vegan she had up being kind of
out of the workforce for a few years
taking care of a child she's a she's a
parent and
she said something similar with a
different set of examples a different
sort of focus and emphasis but she was
like cheetah she was reacting to the
kind of ridiculous ego trip that some
vegans seem to be on in thinking both
that veganism is the answer to all
ethical political questions that
veganism is the only way to make the
world a better place and the notion that
vegans as individual people are innately
morally superior to someone who eats
meat but who may be tackling some very
serious problem in the world what I said
to her then it's actually similar to
what i have to say duh to the cheetah
now I think you have a lack of of
real-world experience and thank you
you've met whether it's because you've
been out of the workforce for a few
years we haven't dealt with this type of
issue for a few years you've forgotten
or you haven't seen firsthand the way in
which questions of veganism overlap in
the workplace in the field in practice
with any other humanitarian potentially
may have and sometimes just makes that
other humanitarian pretension into a
complete joke let's say you're involved
with humanitarian work in Laos Cambodia
or Thailand I'm choosing examples that
you guys know or close to my own heart
close to my own past work experience is
there a difference between having a crew
of 20 men set down in a small village
part of a humanitarian project let's
assume this is the most basic
indisputable form of humanitarian aid
possible they're going to this village
to help alleviate poverty and starvation
so you got 20 guys one of them's an
architect one of them is a specialist in
plumbing you got a bunch of guys who do
agricultural reform you know whole bunch
of specialists whole bunch of people
willing to work and lend a hand somehow
you've already done the fundraising
raise this money ok do you think it has
an impact a significant impact if all 20
of those guys at the end of their days
work immediately go to drink alcohol and
visit prostitutes as a huge impact
and I'm sorry to say this is not really
a hypothetical example if you have
real-world experience in third world
development I hate this use the word
development but that's that's what
people call it in poverty alleviation
projects and humanitarian work yes the
simple issue of whether or not the
employees of your charity are going to
the brothel or visiting prostitutes this
can have really dynamic consequences on
the target community or visiting whether
it's a small town you know a small
remote town where there's the total
population is small or even if it's a
big city in the major cities of
Southeast Asia like you know VN Chen the
capital city of Laos or put on pen you
know there were in effect whole whole
neighborhood's dominated by you know the
Lords of poverty by people who had
gotten rich from united nations programs
from you know international NGO programs
people who are employed by charities of
various kinds sometimes including
christian charities and their lifestyle
choices shall we say in terms of luxury
in terms of food in terms of wine in
terms of women had a massive impact on
and transformed whole parts of the city
and it is odious and it does in many
cases make a joke out of what's being
done with the rest of the donors money
so I myself was in projects where in
terms of the budget I would be getting
paid next to nothing because I live
there permanently I'm getting paid you
know three hundred dollars a month one
thousand dollars mother getting paid
next to nothing and there'd be someone
flown in for the project so someone will
be paid to fly from Paris to pinole penh
cambodia and stay in a hotel the hotel
costs 200 US dollars a night so the cost
of that flight and the cost of putting
that person hotel is enormous compared
to my salary and its enormous compared
to the money actually being given to
poor people the money actually going
into delivering the outcomes that the
project is supposed to be pursuing there
have been many books written on this
subject I myself was the editor editor
and ghostwriter for a very interesting
book on the subject
you know there has been a lot of
research on this on aid effectiveness
and measuring real-world outcomes for
humanitarian projects but I'm coming by
at this point the ethics of the actual
individuals involved apart from the
disbursement of the budget has a huge
impact yes it matters whether you've got
20 guys who are all going to the bar to
get drunk after work or all going to the
brothel or if you have people who
regardless of their paycheck Rose so
much money they're being given really
take seriously their ethical commitment
to the project and its goals 24-7 a huge
difference and people in that line of
work will say things to you and said
things like this to me if you engage in
a critique of what's going on in that
industry those say things like well what
do you expect do you expect us to live
like Buddhist monks and I was in the
minority of people who could stare them
back right in the face and say have you
ever tried living in a Buddhist
monastery the reality is there are
Buddhist monks who do humanitarian
projects there are Buddhist monasteries
that are more luxurious than this room
I'm living in right now I myself have
met and interviewed one Buddhist monk
who was running a charity a legit NGO
charity that charity wasn't helping the
poor it was helping AIDS orphans so
children whose parents had died of
hiv/aids you know he lived in a Buddhist
monastery he was a real Buddhist monk
the only real collaboration yet he had
some support from his mom and he used
that Buddhist monastery as his home and
his office and he collected donations
and gave tours to visitors and showed
them his project he was kind of trying
to build like a little village where
these kids could grow up you know a
series of buildings um these kids whose
parents had died but in most cases of
the parents knew in advance you know for
a couple of years aids would kill them
relatively gradually they know they were
going to die so they could make
arrangements for their kids as orphans
so very sad very difficult situation
totally legit NGO charity and he lives
like a Buddhist monk what do you want he
sleeps how much they pay etcetera ah ah
so you know this kind of cynicism as if
it's inevitable that because you're a
project manager for a charity
you should be drinking imported wine
eating imported cheese eating steak
going to nightclubs going to brothels
living this kind of ludicrously
luxurious life in the midst of
third-world poverty it really is an open
question now obviously this has been a
long intro to talking about veganism the
impacts for eating meat are in many ways
much more real and much more
non-negotiable than the impacts for
people you know drinking alcohol or
visiting prostitutes I just want to say
I have other videos telling this I am
NOT sex- and actually I think anyone who
does the real research will see that
most countries to take a middle path on
prostitution are taking a more effective
path and prostitution is something
that's inevitable it's existed in every
society in history of the world I think
we do ultimately need to have a tolerant
attitude towards prostitution however
you know when you're literally a you
know a charity employee in a third world
country and I've written some essays I
can post links to you know it's
Christian charity in northern Laos
getting teenage girls pregnant and then
you know arranging illegal abortions and
so on you know it gets things get murky
quick uh you know at a minimum you
talking about a conflict of interest
anyway my point is I'm not entirely sex-
I'm not entirely intolerant towards
these things but the contrast between
the pretensions of humanitarian
intervention and what actually happens
with those money and what the employees
of charity I should do with it can be
extremely unseemly now I've said this
perform this channel I have been in
small towns in Laos where I was there as
a charity employees an NGO workers
someone with humanitarian pretensions
and the impact of just five people
eating steak every day you can see the
environmental impacts okay you can see
the blood in the river you can see the
corpses the animals being chopped up at
the market you know if you're talking
about a project with 20 or 50 employees
yes the impact in a small town in a
third world country of those people
eating meat is something you see day in
and day out and in the big city you can
kid yourself about it a bit more you
see the ecological back you don't see
the animal actually having its throat
cut the way you do in a small town
because I've seen it I've been there but
yes you know there is a big difference
between having a charity project where
those people are really mindful II
thinking about the consequences of their
action for the environment for the
animals etc etc 24-7 where their
sincerely committed to make you pause
the difference in the world and a group
of people who you know the minute the
clock strikes five when they're when
their shift ends are going and eating
you know steak frite or whatever real
sorry both the both padam padam V
enchant have a lot of French restaurants
or French style restaurants people who
are cutting the throats of a cow on
daily basis this brings up a memory of a
particular essay that i read on this
topic from a guy who was not vegan but a
guy was pointing out with a particular
charity project a community a project in
cambodia this group of people who are
all you know Europeans white white
Westers various kinds they were
supposedly going to help this community
and he suggested he said look in this
community this remote poverty stricken
town in cambodia when they're going to
start a project when they're going to
get people motivated when they're going
to announce something important in the
town what they do is buy a water buffalo
and ritually slaughter it and share out
the meat among the community they do
that that's their tradition for
different types of important
announcements important decisions made
by the by the town mayor or by the town
chief I think that town had a chief
instead for the community as a whole so
we said look you know the way to
announce this project the way to get the
community the real community on side is
to do this is to pay a few dollars by a
vile water buffalo and publicly execute
it uh and the response from the other
people i think we're mostly French in
this charity project was complete horror
and they their excuse for not doing this
was that that would be a waste of the
project money that donors had not
donated the money for that reason but he
pointed out in his essay all the things
they did spend the money on that
included literally you know wine and
cheese
were they had wine cheese and beef you
know they're killing a cow anyway but
those were only attended by wealthy
elite people in the capital city none of
the members of the community they were
supposed to helping were there and the
real cost of these you know kind of wine
and cheese events these kind of
hobnobbing events that were for the
employees of the charity basically to
celebrate their own wealth and privilege
and to liaised with you know employees
in the United Nations or other
international charities what have you uh
this also is not what the donors donated
money to you for right and you know for
me of course what stood out there is the
point that you are killing cows anyway
um in the real world context of trying
to make a difference politically through
charity work through NGOs through
activism what have you I'm sorry but I
think if people like cheetah really had
that experience of seeing that
incongruous contrast between the
pretensions of trying to help people and
the bloody reality of people indulging
in eating meat on a daily basis I find
that much harder to cope with and much
harder to negotiate with then being part
of a charitable project where the other
people are sleeping with prostitutes
depending on where you are prostitution
may be legal it may not be illegal they
may have the legal right to do that I
remember on one of my projects it was a
charity NGO type of thing there was
another guy who worked me every day and
I noticed he was going a bit crazy for
some reason you know I didn't want to
know about his personal life but later I
was told after he quit the job you know
yeah that guy he just destroyed his
marriage he had a long-term well we had
a wife and she left him because he had
taken up with a prostitute and it wasn't
merely casual prostitution apparently he
had he had paid for this prostitute to
live to move into an apartment he had
not just been casually dabbling
prostitution we had gotten seriously
involved in a relationship with with the
prostitute now that guy was kind of bad
at his job at a number of different ways
uh you know I mean he had other other
feelings in life uh you know but even
though I may have my own animus against
prostitution some of you watching this
channel will be sex positive feminists
who regard prostitution is a very
positive or normal part ciety some of
you are conservative Catholics who
regard prostitution is very negative
despite what it says about prostitution
the Old Testament whatever your personal
take on that issue is the reality is it
doesn't have the same kind of you know
lamentable irreversible effects that we
see every day from the meat and dairy
industry and I know the meaning dairy
industry is so enormous that it seems
like you can ask the question what
difference will one person make or what
difference will 20 people make or what
difference will 200 people make but
that's not the point the point is the
change has to start somewhere and I'm
asking it to start with you and the
reality is if you live in these
countries Thailand Laos or Cambodia the
prostitution industry is enormous it's
so vast that anyone there would be
within their rights to say well what
difference will too two more people make
or 20 more people or 200 people this is
a multimillion-dollar industry with huge
numbers of people involved but if if I'm
the executive in a charity it's not
business the charity's about helping
people I think I do have every right to
turn to my employees and say even if
this is legal even a prostitution is not
illegal I'm asking you to sign a code of
conduct if you take this job that you're
not going to engage in prostitution that
you're not going to be a client or or
prostate yourself that you are you are
going to remove yourself from this
equation because if we are charity
workers if we're taking donors money
when pursuing this mandate make the
world a better place I have to ask where
is the change going to come from if I
can't ask this of you who can I ask it
from the the guy who's 70 years old and
retired you know the sex tourist you
know the guy the guys down at the
nightclub with a drug dealer on the
corner no I'm asking it of you because
you're supposed to be better than this
because you made a decision to make the
your career you said this was your
passion I'm asking you to answer to a
higher moral code than the bare minimum
of what you know the law allows you to
do with your life and yeah I mean
veganism it is one of those things in
principle I really can sympathize with
where cheetah was coming from on this
issue I really sympathize the extent to
which he's disillusioned with the
[ __ ] in the vegan community and as I
mentioned this other person this this
woman I've talked to on skype who's been
raising a kid for a couple of years but
out of the workforce I understand from a
purely theoretical perspective why they
would say for example someone who was a
hunter someone who eats meat and hunts
animals but who is really a committed
conservationist who's really committed
to Deep Ecology let's say why someone
like that maybe from their perspective
just as morally good as a vegan pursuing
the same goals but in practice when
you're in that village when you're
seeing that animal having its throat
slit when you're seeing the blood pour
into the river when you're seeing the
cow [ __ ] ruining the village the places
the children would play making life
terrible for human beings as well as
terrible for the animals whose life is
torture from the day though from the day
they're born till the day they die when
you're there in that context just like
this sort of impalpable question of what
do you do when work ends yes it matters
if you're a drunk yes it matters if
you're a heroin addict matters if you're
if you're going to the brothel even if
you have that right when we're pursuing
those kinds of outcomes when we're
answering to some kind of higher moral
code all those things matter matter
tremendously and you know they matter
because of who we are they matter
because of who we become and they also
matter because of those immutable
outcomes they have in the real world and
you know a lot of you guys think I'm a
jerk and that's cool I own it all right
and in the charity industry a lot of
people thought I was a jerk because I
didn't go to the brothel I didn't go to
the sports bar I didn't drink alcohol I
didn't compromise in many ways I lived
more like a monk then those other people
in that industry
but man as the years go by the ultimate
victims of the permanent vacation
lifestyle are the people who are on
vacation themselves and the ultimate
victims of the alcohol and the
prostitutes and the life of
self-indulgence are the people who are
indulging themselves because boy five
years go by that way and a guy like me I
may be a jerk but I'm hitting the books
I'm learning I'm suffering I'm looking
for a way to make a positive difference
in the world any way I can all that
process I go through changes Who I am
even if it doesn't change the world or
even it changes the world and only a
tiny way and the other people the people
who are saying what difference will it
make what difference does it make if we
won more steak what if differences make
of a one more pot of yogurt or one more
one more piece of ice cream that's made
out of a cow's tit instead of rice milk
you know the people say what difference
does it make the difference that it
makes is you homeboy because after
you've been doing this for five years or
ten years you've come to resemble
everything you despised you've become
that [ __ ] scumbag in downtown
vientiane or downtown padam pen and I've
seen them some of them work for the
United Nations some of them work for the
EU some of them work for United States
aid doesn't matter some of them work for
that Catholic Church straight up okay
you've been corrupted by your own
[ __ ] humanitarian pretensions and
see what you will eating food is
something you probably do at least three
times a day it's an ethical decision you
make the changes who you are and changes
the world around you at the same time
and I'm sorry I thank you people
including cheetah who's a friend of mine
if you get out and have more that real
world experience you'll you'll feel more
of that fire that I'm trying to share
with you right now you'll feel more that
contempt for people who try to have it
both ways people who try to wear that
crown of making the world a better place
but they themselves are not trying to be
better people they're not true trying to
do the best they can and in 2016 if you
ask me is being vegan an ineluctable
element of being the best person you can
be of trying your best and doing the
best you can you're damn right it is